



Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









         _To escape from Mars, all Clayton had to do was the
         impossible. Break out of a crack-proof exile camp--get
         onto a ship that couldn't be boarded--smash through an
         impenetrable wall of steel. Perhaps he could do all
         these things, but he discovered that Mars did evil
         things to men; that he wasn't even Clayton any more.
         He was only--_


                          THE MAN WHO
                                  HATED MARS

                          By RANDALL GARRETT


[Illustration: The frightful carnage would go down in the bloody history
of space.]


"I want you to put me in prison!" the big, hairy man said in a trembling
voice.

He was addressing his request to a thin woman sitting behind a desk that
seemed much too big for her. The plaque on the desk said:

                           LT. PHOEBE HARRIS
                     TERRAN REHABILITATION SERVICE

Lieutenant Harris glanced at the man before her for only a moment before
she returned her eyes to the dossier on the desk; but long enough to
verify the impression his voice had given. Ron Clayton was a big, ugly,
cowardly, dangerous man.

He said: "Well? Dammit, say something!"

The lieutenant raised her eyes again. "Just be patient until I've read
this." Her voice and eyes were expressionless, but her hand moved
beneath the desk.

Clayton froze. _She's yellow!_ he thought. She's turned on the trackers!
He could see the pale greenish glow of their little eyes watching him
all around the room. If he made any fast move, they would cut him down
with a stun beam before he could get two feet.

She had thought he was going to jump her. _Little rat!_ he thought,
_somebody ought to slap her down!_

He watched her check through the heavy dossier in front of her. Finally,
she looked up at him again.

"Clayton, your last conviction was for strong-arm robbery. You were
given a choice between prison on Earth and freedom here on Mars. You
picked Mars."

He nodded slowly. He'd been broke and hungry at the time. A sneaky
little rat named Johnson had bilked Clayton out of his fair share of the
Corey payroll job, and Clayton had been forced to get the money somehow.
He hadn't mussed the guy up much; besides, it was the sucker's own
fault. If he hadn't tried to yell--

Lieutenant Harris went on: "I'm afraid you can't back down now."

"But it isn't fair! The most I'd have got on that frame-up would've
been ten years. I've been here fifteen already!"

"I'm sorry, Clayton. It can't be done. You're here. Period. Forget about
trying to get back. Earth doesn't want you." Her voice sounded choppy,
as though she were trying to keep it calm.

Clayton broke into a whining rage. "You can't do that! It isn't fair! I
never did anything to you! I'll go talk to the Governor! He'll listen to
reason! You'll see! I'll--"

"_Shut up!_" the woman snapped harshly. "I'm getting sick of it! I
personally think you should have been locked up--permanently. I think
this idea of forced colonization is going to breed trouble for Earth
someday, but it is about the only way you can get anybody to colonize
this frozen hunk of mud.

"Just keep it in mind that I don't like it any better than you do--_and
I didn't strong-arm anybody to deserve the assignment!_ Now get out of
here!"

She moved a hand threateningly toward the manual controls of the stun
beam.

Clayton retreated fast. The trackers ignored anyone walking away from
the desk; they were set only to spot threatening movements toward it.

Outside the Rehabilitation Service Building, Clayton could feel the
tears running down the inside of his face mask. He'd asked again and
again--God only knew how many times--in the past fifteen years. Always
the same answer. No.

When he'd heard that this new administrator was a woman, he'd hoped she
might be easier to convince. She wasn't. If anything, she was harder
than the others.

The heat-sucking frigidity of the thin Martian air whispered around him
in a feeble breeze. He shivered a little and began walking toward the
recreation center.

There was a high, thin piping in the sky above him which quickly became
a scream in the thin air.

He turned for a moment to watch the ship land, squinting his eyes to see
the number on the hull.

Fifty-two. Space Transport Ship Fifty-two.

Probably bringing another load of poor suckers to freeze to death on
Mars.

That was the thing he hated about Mars--the cold. The everlasting damned
cold! And the oxidation pills; take one every three hours or smother in
the poor, thin air.

The government could have put up domes; it could have put in
building-to-building tunnels, at least. It could have done a hell of a
lot of things to make Mars a decent place for human beings.

But no--the government had other ideas. A bunch of bigshot scientific
characters had come up with the idea nearly twenty-three years before.
Clayton could remember the words on the sheet he had been given when he
was sentenced.

"Mankind is inherently an adaptable animal. If we are to colonize the
planets of the Solar System, we must meet the conditions on those
planets as best we can.

"Financially, it is impracticable to change an entire planet from its
original condition to one which will support human life as it exists on
Terra.

"But man, since he is adaptable, can change himself--modify his
structure slightly--so that he can live on these planets with only a
minimum of change in the environment."

       *       *       *       *       *

So they made you live outside and like it. So you froze and you choked
and you suffered.

Clayton hated Mars. He hated the thin air and the cold. More than
anything, he hated the cold.

Ron Clayton wanted to go home.

The Recreation Building was just ahead; at least it would be warm
inside. He pushed in through the outer and inner doors, and he heard the
burst of music from the jukebox. His stomach tightened up into a hard
cramp.

They were playing Heinlein's _Green Hills of Earth_.

There was almost no other sound in the room, although it was full of
people. There were plenty of colonists who claimed to like Mars, but
even they were silent when that song was played.

Clayton wanted to go over and smash the machine--make it stop reminding
him. He clenched his teeth and his fists and his eyes and cursed
mentally. _God, how I hate Mars!_

       *       *       *       *       *

When the hauntingly nostalgic last chorus faded away, he walked over to
the machine and fed it full of enough coins to keep it going on
something else until he left.

At the bar, he ordered a beer and used it to wash down another oxidation
tablet. It wasn't good beer; it didn't even deserve the name. The
atmospheric pressure was so low as to boil all the carbon dioxide out
of it, so the brewers never put it back in after fermentation.

He was sorry for what he had done--really and truly sorry. If they'd
only give him one more chance, he'd make good. Just one more chance.
He'd work things out.

He'd promised himself that both times they'd put him up before, but
things had been different then. He hadn't really been given another
chance, what with parole boards and all.

Clayton closed his eyes and finished the beer. He ordered another.

He'd worked in the mines for fifteen years. It wasn't that he minded
work really, but the foreman had it in for him. Always giving him a bad
time; always picking out the lousy jobs for him.

Like the time he'd crawled into a side-boring in Tunnel 12 for a nap
during lunch and the foreman had caught him. When he promised never to
do it again if the foreman wouldn't put it on report, the guy said,
"Yeah. Sure. Hate to hurt a guy's record."

Then he'd put Clayton on report anyway. Strictly a rat.

Not that Clayton ran any chance of being fired; they never fired
anybody. But they'd fined him a day's pay. A whole day's pay.

He tapped his glass on the bar, and the barman came over with another
beer. Clayton looked at it, then up at the barman. "Put a head on it."

The bartender looked at him sourly. "I've got some soapsuds here,
Clayton, and one of these days I'm gonna put some in your beer if you
keep pulling that gag."

That was the trouble with some guys. No sense of humor.

Somebody came in the door and then somebody else came in behind him, so
that both inner and outer doors were open for an instant. A blast of icy
breeze struck Clayton's back, and he shivered. He started to say
something, then changed his mind; the doors were already closed again,
and besides, one of the guys was bigger than he was.

The iciness didn't seem to go away immediately. It was like the mine.
Little old Mars was cold clear down to her core--or at least down as far
as they'd drilled. The walls were frozen and seemed to radiate a chill
that pulled the heat right out of your blood.

Somebody was playing _Green Hills_ again, damn them. Evidently all of
his own selections had run out earlier than he'd thought they would.

Hell! There was nothing to do here. He might as well go home.

"Gimme another beer, Mac."

He'd go home as soon as he finished this one.

He stood there with his eyes closed, listening to the music and hating
Mars.

A voice next to him said: "I'll have a whiskey."

       *       *       *       *       *

The voice sounded as if the man had a bad cold, and Clayton turned
slowly to look at him. After all the sterilization they went through
before they left Earth, nobody on Mars ever had a cold, so there was
only one thing that would make a man's voice sound like that.

Clayton was right. The fellow had an oxygen tube clamped firmly over his
nose. He was wearing the uniform of the Space Transport Service.

"Just get in on the ship?" Clayton asked conversationally.

The man nodded and grinned. "Yeah. Four hours before we take off again."
He poured down the whiskey. "Sure cold out."

Clayton agreed. "It's always cold." He watched enviously as the
spaceman ordered another whiskey.

Clayton couldn't afford whiskey. He probably could have by this time, if
the mines had made him a foreman, like they should have.

Maybe he could talk the spaceman out of a couple of drinks.

"My name's Clayton. Ron Clayton."

The spaceman took the offered hand. "Mine's Parkinson, but everybody
calls me Parks."

"Sure, Parks. Uh--can I buy you a beer?"

Parks shook his head. "No, thanks. I started on whiskey. Here, let me
buy you one."

"Well--thanks. Don't mind if I do."

They drank them in silence, and Parks ordered two more.

"Been here long?" Parks asked.

"Fifteen years. Fifteen long, long years."

"Did you--uh--I mean--" Parks looked suddenly confused.

Clayton glanced quickly to make sure the bartender was out of earshot.
Then he grinned. "You mean am I a convict? Nah. I came here because I
wanted to. But--" He lowered his voice. "--we don't talk about it around
here. You know." He gestured with one hand--a gesture that took in
everyone else in the room.

Parks glanced around quickly, moving only his eyes. "Yeah. I see," he
said softly.

"This your first trip?" asked Clayton.

"First one to Mars. Been on the Luna run a long time."

"Low pressure bother you much?"

"Not much. We only keep it at six pounds in the ships. Half helium and
half oxygen. Only thing that bothers me is the oxy here. Or rather, the
oxy that _isn't_ here." He took a deep breath through his nose tube to
emphasize his point.

Clayton clamped his teeth together, making the muscles at the side of
his jaw stand out.

Parks didn't notice. "You guys have to take those pills, don't you?"

"Yeah."

"I had to take them once. Got stranded on Luna. The cat I was in broke
down eighty some miles from Aristarchus Base and I had to walk
back--with my oxy low. Well, I figured--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Clayton listened to Parks' story with a great show of attention, but he
had heard it before. This "lost on the moon" stuff and its variations
had been going the rounds for forty years. Every once in a while, it
actually did happen to someone; just often enough to keep the story
going.

This guy did have a couple of new twists, but not enough to make the
story worthwhile.

"Boy," Clayton said when Parks had finished, "you were lucky to come out
of that alive!"

Parks nodded, well pleased with himself, and bought another round of
drinks.

"Something like that happened to me a couple of years ago," Clayton
began. "I'm supervisor on the third shift in the mines at Xanthe, but at
the time, I was only a foreman. One day, a couple of guys went to a
branch tunnel to--"

It was a very good story. Clayton had made it up himself, so he knew
that Parks had never heard it before. It was gory in just the right
places, with a nice effect at the end.

"--so I had to hold up the rocks with my back while the rescue crew
pulled the others out of the tunnel by crawling between my legs.
Finally, they got some steel beams down there to take the load off, and
I could let go. I was in the hospital for a week," he finished.

Parks was nodding vaguely. Clayton looked up at the clock above the bar
and realized that they had been talking for better than an hour. Parks
was buying another round.

Parks was a hell of a nice fellow.

There was, Clayton found, only one trouble with Parks. He got to talking
so loud that the bartender refused to serve either one of them any more.

       *       *       *       *       *

The bartender said Clayton was getting loud, too, but it was just
because he had to talk loud to make Parks hear him.

Clayton helped Parks put his mask and parka on and they walked out into
the cold night.

Parks began to sing _Green Hills_. About halfway through, he stopped and
turned to Clayton.

"I'm from Indiana."

Clayton had already spotted him as an American by his accent.

"Indiana? That's nice. Real nice."

"Yeah. You talk about green hills, we got green hills in Indiana. What
time is it?"

Clayton told him.

"Jeez-krise! Ol' spaship takes off in an hour. Ought to have one more
drink first."

Clayton realized he didn't like Parks. But maybe he'd buy a bottle.

Sharkie Johnson worked in Fuels Section, and he made a nice little
sideline of stealing alcohol, cutting it, and selling it. He thought it
was real funny to call it Martian Gin.

Clayton said: "Let's go over to Sharkie's. Sharkie will sell us a
bottle."

"Okay," said Parks. "We'll get a bottle. That's what we need: a bottle."

It was quite a walk to the Shark's place. It was so cold that even Parks
was beginning to sober up a little. He was laughing like hell when
Clayton started to sing.

    "We're going over to the Shark's
    To buy a jug of gin for Parks!
    Hi ho, hi ho, hi ho!"

One thing about a few drinks; you didn't get so cold. You didn't feel it
too much, anyway.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Shark still had his light on when they arrived. Clayton whispered to
Parks: "I'll go in. He knows me. He wouldn't sell it if you were around.
You got eight credits?"

"Sure I got eight credits. Just a minute, and I'll give you eight
credits." He fished around for a minute inside his parka, and pulled
out his notecase. His gloved fingers were a little clumsy, but he
managed to get out a five and three ones and hand them to Clayton.

"You wait out here," Clayton said.

He went in through the outer door and knocked on the inner one. He
should have asked for ten credits. Sharkie only charged five, and that
would leave him three for himself. But he could have got ten--maybe
more.

When he came out with the bottle, Parks was sitting on a rock,
shivering.

"Jeez-krise!" he said. "It's cold out here. Let's get to someplace where
it's warm."

"Sure. I got the bottle. Want a drink?"

Parks took the bottle, opened it, and took a good belt out of it.

"Hooh!" he breathed. "Pretty smooth."

As Clayton drank, Parks said: "Hey! I better get back to the field! I
know! We can go to the men's room and finish the bottle before the ship
takes off! Isn't that a good idea? It's warm there."

They started back down the street toward the spacefield.

"Yep, I'm from Indiana. Southern part, down around Bloomington," Parks
said. "Gimme the jug. Not Bloomington, Illinois--Bloomington, Indiana.
We really got green hills down there." He drank, and handed the bottle
back to Clayton. "Pers-nally, I don't see why anybody'd stay on Mars.
Here y'are, practic'ly on the equator in the middle of the summer, and
it's colder than hell. Brrr!

"Now if you was smart, you'd go home, where it's warm. Mars wasn't built
for people to live on, anyhow. I don't see how you stand it."

That was when Clayton decided he really hated Parks.

And when Parks said: "Why be dumb, friend? Whyn't you go home?" Clayton
kicked him in the stomach, hard.

"And that, that--" Clayton said as Parks doubled over.

He said it again as he kicked him in the head. And in the ribs. Parks
was gasping as he writhed on the ground, but he soon lay still.

Then Clayton saw why. Parks' nose tube had come off when Clayton's foot
struck his head.

Parks was breathing heavily, but he wasn't getting any oxygen.

That was when the Big Idea hit Ron Clayton. With a nosepiece on like
that, you couldn't tell who a man was. He took another drink from the
jug and then began to take Parks' clothes off.

The uniform fit Clayton fine, and so did the nose mask. He dumped his
own clothing on top of Parks' nearly nude body, adjusted the little
oxygen tank so that the gas would flow properly through the mask, took
the first deep breath of good air he'd had in fifteen years, and walked
toward the spacefield.

       *       *       *       *       *

He went into the men's room at the Port Building, took a drink, and felt
in the pockets of the uniform for Parks' identification. He found it and
opened the booklet. It read:

                          PARKINSON, HERBERT J.
                         Steward 2nd Class, STS

Above it was a photo, and a set of fingerprints.

Clayton grinned. They'd never know it wasn't Parks getting on the ship.

Parks was a steward, too. A cook's helper. That was good. If he'd been a
jetman or something like that, the crew might wonder why he wasn't on
duty at takeoff. But a steward was different.

Clayton sat for several minutes, looking through the booklet and
drinking from the bottle. He emptied it just before the warning sirens
keened through the thin air.

Clayton got up and went outside toward the ship.

"Wake up! Hey, you! Wake up!"

Somebody was slapping his cheeks. Clayton opened his eyes and looked at
the blurred face over his own.

From a distance, another voice said: "Who is it?"

The blurred face said: "I don't know. He was asleep behind these cases.
I think he's drunk."

Clayton wasn't drunk--he was sick. His head felt like hell. Where the
devil was he?

"Get up, bud. Come on, get up!"

Clayton pulled himself up by holding to the man's arm. The effort made
him dizzy and nauseated.

The other man said: "Take him down to sick bay, Casey. Get some thiamin
into him."

Clayton didn't struggle as they led him down to the sick bay. He was
trying to clear his head. Where was he? He must have been pretty drunk
last night.

He remembered meeting Parks. And getting thrown out by the bartender.
Then what?

Oh, yeah. He'd gone to the Shark's for a bottle. From there on, it was
mostly gone. He remembered a fight or something, but that was all that
registered.

The medic in the sick bay fired two shots from a hypo-gun into both
arms, but Clayton ignored the slight sting.

"Where am I?"

"Real original. Here, take these." He handed Clayton a couple of
capsules, and gave him a glass of water to wash them down with.

When the water hit his stomach, there was an immediate reaction.

"Oh, Christ!" the medic said. "Get a mop, somebody. Here, bud; heave
into this." He put a basin on the table in front of Clayton.

It took them the better part of an hour to get Clayton awake enough to
realize what was going on and where he was. Even then, he was plenty
groggy.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was the First Officer of the STS-52 who finally got the story
straight. As soon as Clayton was in condition, the medic and the
quartermaster officer who had found him took him up to the First
Officer's compartment.

"I was checking through the stores this morning when I found this man.
He was asleep, dead drunk, behind the crates."

"He was drunk, all right," supplied the medic. "I found this in his
pocket." He flipped a booklet to the First Officer.

The First was a young man, not older than twenty-eight with
tough-looking gray eyes. He looked over the booklet.

"Where did you get Parkinson's ID booklet? And his uniform?"

Clayton looked down at his clothes in wonder. "I don't know."

"You _don't know_? That's a hell of an answer."

"Well, I was drunk," Clayton said defensively. "A man doesn't know what
he's doing when he's drunk." He frowned in concentration. He knew he'd
have to think up some story.

"I kind of remember we made a bet. I bet him I could get on the ship.
Sure--I remember, now. That's what happened; I bet him I could get on
the ship and we traded clothes."

"Where is he now?"

"At my place, sleeping it off, I guess."

"Without his oxy-mask?"

"Oh, I gave him my oxidation pills for the mask."

The First shook his head. "That sounds like the kind of trick Parkinson
would pull, all right. I'll have to write it up and turn you both in to
the authorities when we hit Earth." He eyed Clayton. "What's your name?"

"Cartwright. Sam Cartwright," Clayton said without batting an eye.

"Volunteer or convicted colonist?"

"Volunteer."

The First looked at him for a long moment, disbelief in his eyes.

It didn't matter. Volunteer or convict, there was no place Clayton could
go. From the officer's viewpoint, he was as safely imprisoned in the
spaceship as he would be on Mars or a prison on Earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

The First wrote in the log book, and then said: "Well, we're one man
short in the kitchen. You wanted to take Parkinson's place; brother,
you've got it--without pay." He paused for a moment.

"You know, of course," he said judiciously, "that you'll be shipped back
to Mars immediately. And you'll have to work out your passage both
ways--it will be deducted from your pay."

Clayton nodded. "I know."

"I don't know what else will happen. If there's a conviction, you may
lose your volunteer status on Mars. And there may be fines taken out of
your pay, too.

"Well, that's all, Cartwright. You can report to Kissman in the
kitchen."

The First pressed a button on his desk and spoke into the intercom. "Who
was on duty at the airlock when the crew came aboard last night? Send
him up. I want to talk to him."

Then the quartermaster officer led Clayton out the door and took him to
the kitchen.

The ship's driver tubes were pushing it along at a steady five hundred
centimeters per second squared acceleration, pushing her steadily closer
to Earth with a little more than half a gravity of drive.

       *       *       *       *       *

There wasn't much for Clayton to do, really. He helped to select the
foods that went into the automatics, and he cleaned them out after each
meal was cooked. Once every day, he had to partially dismantle them for
a really thorough going-over.

And all the time, he was thinking.

Parkinson must be dead; he knew that. That meant the Chamber. And even
if he wasn't, they'd send Clayton back to Mars. Luckily, there was no
way for either planet to communicate with the ship; it was hard enough
to keep a beam trained on a planet without trying to hit such a
comparatively small thing as a ship.

But they would know about it on Earth by now. They would pick him up the
instant the ship landed. And the best he could hope for was a return to
Mars.

No, by God! He wouldn't go back to that frozen mud-ball! He'd stay on
Earth, where it was warm and comfortable and a man could live where he
was meant to live. Where there was plenty of air to breathe and plenty
of water to drink. Where the beer tasted like beer and not like slop.
Earth. Good green hills, the like of which exists nowhere else.

Slowly, over the days, he evolved a plan. He watched and waited and
checked each little detail to make sure nothing would go wrong. It
_couldn't_ go wrong. He didn't want to die, and he didn't want to go
back to Mars.

Nobody on the ship liked him; they couldn't appreciate his position. He
hadn't done anything to them, but they just didn't like him. He didn't
know why; he'd _tried_ to get along with them. Well, if they didn't like
him, the hell with them.

If things worked out the way he figured, they'd be damned sorry.

He was very clever about the whole plan. When turn-over came, he
pretended to get violently spacesick. That gave him an opportunity to
steal a bottle of chloral hydrate from the medic's locker.

And, while he worked in the kitchen, he spent a great deal of time
sharpening a big carving knife.

Once, during his off time, he managed to disable one of the ship's two
lifeboats. He was saving the other for himself.

The ship was eight hours out from Earth and still decelerating when
Clayton pulled his getaway.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was surprisingly easy. He was supposed to be asleep when he sneaked
down to the drive compartment with the knife. He pushed open the door,
looked in, and grinned like an ape.

The Engineer and the two jetmen were out cold from the chloral hydrate
in the coffee from the kitchen.

Moving rapidly, he went to the spares locker and began methodically to
smash every replacement part for the drivers. Then he took three of the
signal bombs from the emergency kit, set them for five minutes, and
placed them around the driver circuits.

He looked at the three sleeping men. What if they woke up before the
bombs went off? He didn't want to kill them though. He wanted them to
know what had happened and who had done it.

He grinned. There was a way. He simply had to drag them outside and jam
the door lock. He took the key from the Engineer, inserted it, turned
it, and snapped off the head, leaving the body of the key still in the
lock. Nobody would unjam it in the next four minutes.

Then he began to run up the stairwell toward the good lifeboat.

He was panting and out of breath when he arrived, but no one had stopped
him. No one had even seen him.

He clambered into the lifeboat, made everything ready, and waited.

The signal bombs were not heavy charges; their main purposes was to make
a flare bright enough to be seen for thousands of miles in space.
Fluorine and magnesium made plenty of light--and heat.

Quite suddenly, there was no gravity. He had felt nothing, but he knew
that the bombs had exploded. He punched the LAUNCH switch on the
control board of the lifeboat, and the little ship leaped out from the
side of the greater one.

Then he turned on the drive, set it at half a gee, and watched the
STS-52 drop behind him. It was no longer decelerating, so it would miss
Earth and drift on into space. On the other hand, the lifeship would
come down very neatly within a few hundred miles of the spaceport in
Utah, the destination of the STS-52.

Landing the lifeship would be the only difficult part of the maneuver,
but they were designed to be handled by beginners. Full instructions
were printed on the simplified control board.

       *       *       *       *       *

Clayton studied them for a while, then set the alarm to waken him in
seven hours and dozed off to sleep.

He dreamed of Indiana. It was full of nice, green hills and leafy woods,
and Parkinson was inviting him over to his mother's house for chicken
and whiskey. And all for free.

Beneath the dream was the calm assurance that they would never catch him
and send him back. When the STS-52 failed to show up, they would think
he had been lost with it. They would never look for him.

When the alarm rang, Earth was a mottled globe looming hugely beneath
the ship. Clayton watched the dials on the board, and began to follow
the instructions on the landing sheet.

He wasn't too good at it. The accelerometer climbed higher and higher,
and he felt as though he could hardly move his hands to the proper
switches.

He was less than fifteen feet off the ground when his hand slipped. The
ship, out of control, shifted, spun, and toppled over on its side,
smashing a great hole in the cabin.

Clayton shook his head and tried to stand up in the wreckage. He got to
his hands and knees, dizzy but unhurt, and took a deep breath of the
fresh air that was blowing in through the hole in the cabin.

It felt just like home.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                        Bureau of Criminal Investigation
                                                   Regional Headquarters
                                                       Cheyenne, Wyoming
                                                         20 January 2102

 To: Space Transport Service
 Subject: Lifeship 2, STS-52
 Attention Mr. P. D. Latimer

Dear Paul,

I have on hand the copies of your reports on the rescue of the men on
the disabled STS-52. It is fortunate that the Lunar radar stations could
compute their orbit.

The detailed official report will follow, but briefly, this is what
happened:

The lifeship landed--or, rather, crashed--several miles west of
Cheyenne, as you know, but it was impossible to find the man who was
piloting it until yesterday because of the weather.

He has been identified as Ronald Watkins Clayton, exiled to Mars fifteen
years ago.

Evidently, he didn't realize that fifteen years of Martian gravity had
so weakened his muscles that he could hardly walk under the pull of a
full Earth gee.

As it was, he could only crawl about a hundred yards from the wrecked
lifeship before he collapsed.

Well, I hope this clears up everything.

I hope you're not getting the snow storms up there like we've been
getting them.

                                                          John B. Remley
                                                          Captain, CBI


                                                                 THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ September 1956.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Man Who Hated Mars, by Gordon Randall Garrett

